**Art and Craft: On the Use of Generative AI**

I once saw a [post](https://gearspace.com/board/electronic-music-instruments-and-electronic-music-production/931023-using-loops-cheating.html) on [Gearspace](https://gearspace.com/) (formerly Gearslutz) that resonated with me quite deeply as a musician enchanted with the idea of having a “unique” sound:  

```
I thought that using loops was cheating, so I programmed my own using samples. 
I then thought that using samples was cheating, so I recorded real drums. 
I then thought that programming them was cheating, so I learned to play the drums for real. 
I then thought that using purchased drums was cheating, so I learned to make my own. 
I then thought that using pre-made skins was cheating, so I killed a goat and skinned it. 
I then thought that was cheating too, so I grew my own goat from a baby goat. 
I also think that this is cheating, but I’m not sure where to go from here. 
I haven’t made any music lately, what with the goat farming and all. 
```

This story popped into my head again as I got the brilliant idea last year to make some plugins for myself. Why spend time practicing guitar or producing music when I could spend north of one hundred hours building a tool to help me do those things instead? I admit, it’s a hobby unto itself and fun to do, though the juice is in no way worth the squeeze for the sake of the art. I just genuinely like goat farming.

Music production and session playing is part time work for me, while my day job is that of a software engineer. If you’ve been keeping up with the news, you’re probably sick of hearing about this spiffy new technology called Generative AI (I’ll just be referring to it as AI from here on out, but I specifically mean generative AI). AI is an essential tool for a growing number of engineers. I am one of several engineers on my team who hasn’t written much code by hand in over a year. As such, when I got the idea of building some plugins, it partially came from the fact that the barrier of entry and time commitment for building something has gone down for me, an experienced engineer, with AI as a tool. As a long time admirer of open source software and its contributors, I figured this would be a great opportunity to make a contribution to the world of open source audio software, which I have been using to make art for decades. 

However, having one foot in the music world and one foot in the software world, I know there is a great deal of justified hesitancy on AI and its seemingly inevitable weasling into every area of modern life. I want to share these plugins with other artists, but I know that seeing Claude Code as a contributor to the GitHub repo may be a turnoff for artists who want to reject AI wholesale. The impetus for this essay it to share some of the ways I’ve been thinking about AI and how it relates to the engineering side of my career and the music side of my career so that we can begin to talk about it in more nuanced and concrete ways than “AI is good everywhere” and “AI is an unabated scourge on society”. 

The foundation for this discussion is a distinction between art and craft. Broadly speaking, we can define art as something made primarily for self expression and/or communication. It facilitates human to human interaction. On the other hand, craft is something made primarily to be used or be useful. It facilitates human to material world interaction. Generative AI is a revolutionary and useful tool in the world of craft, but should be kept far away from art as it corrodes the process of human expression. This differentiation will force us into reconsidering how we interact with media of all sorts as it enables us to remove artists from the process of creating entertainment to consume. This essay, as an example, is primarily meant for human to human communication and therefore has had zero AI input or editing (for better or worse\!). 

**Art and Craft**  
Let’s begin by diving a little deeper into the definition of art. This is an enormous topic covered extensively by many of the world’s [greatest thinkers throughout time](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/art-definition/). Different philosophers have had different views on the purpose of art and what defines it. For the sake of this discussion, I’ll be taking some clues from Leo Tolstoy ([*What is Art?,* 1897, chapter V](https://www.gutenberg.org/files/64908/64908-h/64908-h.htm#chap05)):

```
Every work of art causes the receiver to enter into a certain kind of relationship both with him who produced, or is 
producing, the art, and with all those who, simultaneously, previously or subsequently, receive the same artistic impression\[…\] 
And it is on this capacity of man to receive another man’s expression of feeling, and experience those feelings himself, 
that the activity of art is based. \[...\] And it is also art if a man feels or imagines to himself feelings of delight, 
gladness, sorrow, despair, courage, or despondency, and the transition from one to another of these feelings, and expresses 
these feelings by sounds, so that the hearers are infected by them, and experience them as they were experienced by 
the composer. \[...\] If only the spectators or auditors are infected by the feelings which the author has felt, it is art.
```
In this way, art is primarily communicative. Whether that is communicating something to myself as the artist of which I was not cognizant, or communicating something to others about an experience I had or the feelings I felt imagining, the communication of feelings is what makes it art.   
	  
This definition is a bit more abstract and aspirational than anything we may encounter in the real world, though it sets us in the right direction with regards to communication. Tolstoy would require anything that is art to be made from the maker’s own feelings and imaginings, not that of others. One of Tolstoy’s driving critiques in *What Is Art* is that much of what we have considered art throughout history has been artless, commissioned work by the church to pacify the masses and reinforce their dogmas (he was, to everyone's surprise, excommunicated from the Russian church four years after the publication of *What Is Art?*). While internally consistent, I think such an extreme view passes out of the useful realm into a sort of idealism that doesn’t do much to help the average person.

For example, my wife and I co-operate a small music production business. We have made quite a few albums for which we were hired to write parts, play instruments, coach, and mix. This is a commissioned act, which wouldn’t be art under the strict Tolstoy definition. The things we create are earnestly trying to communicate a feeling, but at the same time there is a practical purpose of us having been hired to accomplish a job by a client. In one sense, our art is done within craft-like confines of serving a functional purpose instead of a purely communicative one. I bring up this dissonance to get us into the habit of training ourselves to be discerning, as no real world use case falls neatly into the pure art or pure craft category. 

On the other end of the spectrum, we have craft. Woodworking provides a good framework for discussing craft (that is not to say that woodworking cannot be art under the right circumstances, but many woodworking endeavors are craft). Woodworking has evolved a great deal in the past two hundred years. Craftsmen who once upon a time used hand tools to shape boards and build things one at a time moved to power tools as they became available, improving efficiency and consistency. Along the way, some skills were lost but others were gained. By the late 1900s, [CNC machines](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y1544CtxQ3g) became industry standard for manufacturing. At this stage, the woodworker did not have to do the bulk of the cuts themselves. More skills are lost over time, but now woodworkers with CNC machines need to understand how to use CAD to design and execute cuts. Each tool and each phase of woodworking as a craft has required unique skills. Hand tools, though less precise and hard to use consistently, require great physical control and dexterity. CNC machines require technical knowledge in addition to woodworking knowledge to plan the direction and depth of cuts. The tool with which the craftsman works has changed over time, but does not diminish the overall craftsmanship involved in the final result.

Software is on a similar trajectory. AI opens up whole new realms of power and efficiency for making software much like CNC machines revolutionized woodworking. Much like a modern luthier designs and carves guitar bodies via CAD and CNC machines, modern software engineers are increasingly offloading the actual programming work to AI. Most importantly, neither AI nor a CNC machine are a one stop option to spit out completed products. Both require proper engineering and planning on the front, and lots of sanding and testing afterwards. There are new skills required and some old skills lost, but the overall craftsmanship stays the same. 

Why does the craftsmanship stay the same? Because craft is judged by its results. A well crafted table is functional, durable, and aesthetically pleasing as a bonus. The tools used in the process, whether that be a CNC machine or hand tools, are a neat piece of trivia but do inherently affect how we judge the end product. One could argue that one method is superior to another because it produces better outcomes, but the outcomes are what determine the view of the tools, not the other way around. This is what distinguishes craft from art: art is communicative and expressive between humans, craft is judged by outcomes of function instead.

Given these definitions of art and craft, I post that AI is a tool that is inevitable in the world of craft. The market, around which most of the modern world is organized, has no inherent morality or wisdom. It simply rewards that which is profitable and punishes that which is not. Since the industrial revolution, new inventions have displaced workers in the name of efficiency and progress. Regardless of whether you see that as evil or as a necessary step in the progress of man, it remains a fact of life. AI is no different, and it will continue to propel us into uncharted territory. As a craftsman who is not independently wealthy and has bills to pay, I have no choice but to adapt to the evolution of tools and do so in a way that is thoughtful. The means by which something is crafted are ultimately judged by the end result. 

Art, in the pure definition at least, operates outside this goal-oriented framework. It is judged based on the authenticity of the expression and sharing feelings with others. In this way, AI is not inevitable in art in the slightest. No artist needs to adapt or die. In art, the means most certainly matter in judging the end result. By offloading the artistic, creative expression of art to AI, we corrode the process of sharing meaningful expression. It becomes a facsimile of expression where I as the artist offloaded some or all of the actual expression to something else. A craftsman can offload the work of shaping a guitar body to a CNC machine without changing the nature of their work, but an artist cannot offload the work of expressing a feeling to AI without changing the nature of their work. 

It is important to recognize here that nothing is ever truly wholly one or the other. A songwriter may be primarily driven by an artistic impulse, but the realities of the modern world impart some level of craft in order to produce and share that song in a way that is marketable and palatable. Any big budget film or TV project requires commercial backing and some level of functional end result (profit). A craftsman who makes a beautiful and functional coffee table with accents that tell a story is engaged in some level of artistry within the craft. 

Returning to the impetus for this essay in the first place, the plugins that I built for myself fall firmly in the “craft” category. Some engineers and programmers take great pride in their coding style and the code they write. I take pride in the finished product, but the code itself is just a means to an end for me. As such, I used AI as a tool to build myself something functional in these plugins: they do something for me that I needed. I view them much the same way as my guitar: they are not art in and of themselves, they are tools for myself with which I can make art. While AI had a big role in the construction of these plugins as craft, I hold firm on the line that AI does not have a role in the music that I make as art. 

**Larger Moral Questions**  
[The Good Place](https://www.imdb.com/title/tt4955642/) is a sitcom that took me by surprise. The lead character, Eleanor, dies and ends up in a heavenly afterlife. However, she was a real terrible person in her life and thinks her presence in The Good Place is the source of the strange occurrences that have been happening since her arrival. The first season follows her trying to figure out how she got there and hide her true past. Spoiler alert for The Good Place: turns out she and everyone else there is actually in The Bad Place and they’ve been tricked into thinking it’s The Good Place. They continue their misadventures trying to sort out why they’re all there, and they come to find out that nobody has made it to The Good Place in hundreds of years. As the world became more entangled, the moral repercussions of even small actions became more fraught. Nobody could escape life with a positive morality score. Even something like buying a T-shirt from Walmart ends up becoming a net moral negative because it was made in a sweatshop overseas.   
The show is both hilarious and insightful because the modern world is so deeply interconnected. The sphere of influence for an average person in the 1600s was geographically confined. A modern person, especially a modern American, has direct and indirect global influence in seemingly banal daily decisions. The clothes we buy, the food we eat, the cars we drive, all of it has hundreds of upstream factors that can be both good and bad. The origin and process of products has largely been abstracted away from us. Even [a simple shirt has a global journey](https://www.kqed.org/lowdown/7943/making-your-t-shirt-a-journey-around-the-world) and is touched by many hands before it lands in Target. I bring this up not to try and absolve us from any moral responsibility in the actions we take, but to show that speaking in moral absolutes about the tools and consumables we use is often untenable.

For example, if you believe people should be paid a living wage globally and advocate for that viewpoint, how do you deal with the fact that electronics manufacturing has [deeply](https://www.boisestate.edu/cobe/blog/2025/03/hidden-failures-in-consumer-electronics-sustainability/) [upsetting](https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/campaigns/2016/06/drc-cobalt-child-labour/) [ethical](https://www.thenation.com/article/archive/was-your-smartphone-built-in-a-sweatshop/) [ramifications](https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jun/18/foxconn-life-death-forbidden-city-longhua-suicide-apple-iphone-brian-merchant-one-device-extract)? A “morally pure” stance would require a person to abstain from using modern consumer electronics like smartphones and laptops entirely. However, for the average person who cares about a particular cause, this isn’t really an option. The goalposts shift from “I must remain pure of this thing” to “I must try to push this situation in the right direction”. This is the mindset that I would like to bring to the use of generative AI as a craftsman. At the end of the day, no matter the causes that are near and dear to people, most folks are just trying to do their best given their resources and ability. The tapestry of cares that emerges in a society is both beautiful and complicated. It is both individual and sociological. Each of us has different means and ability to push the moral conversation forward given the reality that most of us are just trying to survive. 

As such, I hesitate to prescribe a stance that every individual should take on art, craft, and AI. However, I’m a pragmatist at heart. In a few years time AI will be unavoidable in software. Even if you don’t use the chatbot, the code that runs your smartphone, your TV, and your car will all be touched by AI. There are some folks who are [rejecting AI wholesale](https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/c15q5qzdjqxo). But this is a fundamentally privileged position that not everyone is able to take. It will only get harder with time. Instead of rejecting it altogether, I believe the pragmatic path forward is to think through how to push it in the right direction. If you disagree and do not want to use these plugins because of the use of AI in their creation, that’s fine and respectable. But by maintaining that stance you will soon find yourself in a world in which no software is safe to use. 

**AI, Art, and Consumerism**  
With some of that moral framing put in place, let’s drill down specifically into the implications of AI for music. We’ve already discussed in the abstract the difference between art and craft, and I’ve suggested that the adoption of AI in craft is inevitable and that artists should reject AI in the realm of art since it fundamentally alters the process of human expression. This art/craft view of things is going to force us as musicians and as consumers to confront some rather uncomfortable truths we may have been living with for years already. 

AI music has been [flooding streaming services](https://time.com/article/2026/03/26/ai-slop-is-threatening-musicians-can-tech-companies-stem-the-tide-/) in recent times. This has been incredibly frustrating for me as a musician and as a big music listener. I’ll go listen to my “My Daily Discovery” playlist on [Tidal](https://tidal.com/) and hear some cool new stuff, only to find out one of the songs I was enjoying is likely AI. This is common across [all](https://musically.com/2025/09/25/spotify-reveals-its-latest-measures-to-handle-ai-music/) [streaming](https://www.reddit.com/r/AppleMusic/comments/1stuj89/according_to_am_vice_president_apple_actively/) platforms at the moment. Even as a seasoned music producer, I’ve been tricked. The challenge in discernment and even my embarrassing temporary enjoyment of the songs forced me to take a step back and think more critically about why I’m listening to music: am I listening to music purely for my own entertainment? Or am I trying to participate in an artistic conversation with the artist? Oftentimes, admittedly, it’s just for entertainment. This is not inherently wrong, but it opens a dangerous door in a world of AI. 

The modern world is quite rampant with [consumerism](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/c/consumerism.asp). It is baked into much of our daily lives, and most assuredly affects the way we interact with art and media. For many of us, we engage with art in a consumeristic fashion: I want to be entertained, so I will consume media that is entertaining. Historically speaking, we haven’t had to confront the ethical implications of this very much because artists have been a necessary step in that process. If I wanted to watch a cozy sitcom purely for entertainment, it required real people to write, act, direct, and produce a full TV show. Artists then get paid in the process. It involved some craft (the studio wanted to make money) and some art (the folks working on it had genuine artistic intent). My personal mindset when interacting with it didn’t quite matter, because artists were making something and sharing it with the world.

AI is now removing the need for real human people to make something for us to consume. We are now confronted with a choice and our inner intentions are revealed: do we want to double down on our consumeristic tendencies and prioritize entertainment over art, or take a step back and investigate our motivations when engaging with the creative output of other human beings? If I could have AI generate me a comfy TV show exactly to my specifications, what would the reason be to avoid doing that? What about having a video game that is generated on the fly to be perfectly suited to my interests and aesthetics? Some folks have an internal warning that feels icky about that, and others don’t. This is a sign that we’ve all been treating art in different ways without having to see the downstream effects of those worldviews. 

When someone uses AI for something that others view as artistic, it betrays that they may view that discipline from a more pragmatic and “crafty” perspective. If a band uses AI to make band merch and tour posters, they reveal that they are viewing those things from a functional perspective instead of an artistic perspective. To be clear, bands have been half-assing merch and branding to check a box for ages, but it has always had the side effect of paying a real artist (or having someone in the band actually make something themselves). That requirement is now gone, and the way we internally view certain mediums and disciplines is being revealed to the world. In the same way, people who use [Suno](https://suno.com/) to “make songs” are revealing that they just want something to which they enjoy listening. I’d wager that they weren’t interacting with music as art before the advent of Suno, but now they have a machine that can spit out something that is *functionally* the same as the music they already listen to, though it is *artistically* void. 

This lifting of the veil on the way people view music is going to be ugly for much of the industries built around art. Music, film, and television are going to have true intentions revealed pretty quickly. Commercial songwriters already use Suno to demo out songs and shop them around quickly, then have real players come in and learn the parts. The commercial music world is adopting AI at a [much higher rate than consumers](https://www.votemyai.com/blog/ai-music-industry-split-two-worlds.html\)). It will be challenging for fans to navigate how to engage with this stuff thoughtfully when much of the art we’ve been engaging with regularly is already “craft”-ified to a high degree, with the function of making money. 

**Closing Thoughts**  
The coming years will be challenging for artists and craftsmen alike. AI is removing some of the barriers that previously prevented consumeristic tendencies from cutting out artists in the world of entertainment. As we reckon with this both individually and in industries at large, we will all be forced to think deeper about the role these tools can and should have in various disciplines in our lives. For craftsmen, AI is going to be a powerful and necessary tool in the toolbelt. Software engineering has been on the frontier of this change, but it is percolating through the rest of the economy with time. Artists and their audiences are faced with a trickier choice that will reveal how they actually view art: is it truly art, the expression of human feeling shared between people, or is it more craft for entertainment? We will all need to consider how we consume and interact with media in a way that is thoughtful and ethical given this new landscape. 

I hope this has given you some food for thought on how to interact with AI in your own life. If you decide you still don’t want it in the tools you use to make art, then feel free to pass on these plugins. Now that I’ve built two plugins and researched/written an essay about the ethical uses of AI, I suppose it is time to get back to actually playing my guitar. 